[8.18] Rule gaps and manual rule runs (#6649)
elastic/security-docs: docs/detections/rules-ui-monitor.asciidoc

For detailed information on a rule, the alerts it generated, and associated errors, click on its name in the table. This also allows you to perform the same actions that are available on the <<rules-ui-management, **Installed Rules** tab>>, such as modifying or deleting rules, activating or deactivating rules, exporting or importing rules, and duplicating prebuilt rules.

> For information about rule execution gaps (which are periods of time when a rule didn't run as expected), use the panel above the table. The time filter on the left allows you to select a time range for viewing gap data. The **Total rules with gaps:** field tells you how many rules have unfilled or partially filled gaps within the selected time range. The **Only rules with gaps** filter on the right lets you only display rules with unfilled or partially filled gaps. 

Reviewer: > a rule didn't run as expected  

It's not super clear what this mean. When rule has error - we can say that it's didn't run as excepted, but there will be no gap.

Author: Is the phrase "as expected" the part that's not quite accurate? I mainly added it because my understanding of the gaps feature is that it helps users monitor and fix interruptions (planned and unplanned) in rule executions.

Is this more accurate instead?

```suggestion
For information about rule execution gaps (which are periods of time when a rule didn't run), use the panel above the table. The time filter on the left allows you to select a time range for viewing gap data. The **Total rules with gaps:** field tells you how many rules have unfilled or partially filled gaps within the selected time range. The **Only rules with gaps** filter on the right lets you only display rules with unfilled or partially filled gaps. 
```

Reviewer 2: I think we can say "information about rule execution gaps (which are periods of time when a rule didn't run)" - it is true, and simpler.
We do plan to make it more refined in the future, but for now this would be accurate

> For information about rule execution gaps (which are periods of time when a rule didn't run as expected), use the panel above the table. The time filter on the left allows you to select a time range for viewing gap data. The **Total rules with gaps:** field tells you how many rules have unfilled or partially filled gaps within the selected time range. The **Only rules with gaps** filter on the right lets you only display rules with unfilled or partially filled gaps. 

Reviewer: > unfilled or partially filled

Maybe we can just only mention `unfilled` as it simpler to understand?

Author: I had considered this, but I think it's important to make the distinction that partially filled gaps are represented here too. If the docs only mentioned unfilled gaps, it could be interpreted gaps that are entirely unfilled (i.e., no partially gaps).

> Within the table, the **Last Gap (if any)** column conveys how long the most recent gap for a rule lasted. The **Unfilled gaps duration** column shows whether a rule still has gaps and provides a total sum of the remaining unfilled or partially filled gaps. If a rule has no gaps, the column displays a dash (`––`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Within the table, the **Last Gap (if any)** column conveys how long the most recent gap for a rule lasted. The **Unfilled gaps duration** column shows whether a rule still has gaps and provides a total sum of the remaining unfilled or partially filled gaps. If a rule has no gaps, these columns display a dash (`––`).
```

> Within the table, the **Last Gap (if any)** column conveys how long the most recent gap for a rule lasted. The **Unfilled gaps duration** column shows whether a rule still has gaps and provides a total sum of the remaining unfilled or partially filled gaps. If a rule has no gaps, these columns display a dash (`––`).

Reviewer 2: Unfilled gaps duration depends on the date picker on the Gaps panel, not sure how to phrase to include this information here

Author: Ah yes, that's important to call out as well. How about this:

```suggestion
Within the table, the **Last Gap (if any)** column conveys how long the most recent gap for a rule lasted. The **Unfilled gaps duration** column shows whether a rule still has gaps and provides a total sum of the remaining unfilled or partially filled gaps. The total sum can change based on the time range that you select in the panel above the table. If a rule has no gaps, both columns display a dash (`––`).
```

Reviewer 2: Looks good, thank you!

TIP: For a detailed view of a rule's gaps, go to the **Execution results** tab and check the <<gaps-table>>.

[float]
[[rule-execution-logs]]
=== Execution results tab

From the **Execution results** tab, you can access the rule’s execution log, monitor and address gaps in a rule's execution schedule, and check manual runs for the rule. To find the tab, click the rule's name to open its details, then scroll down. 

> [float]

Reviewer 2: I think it's not clear how to access the Execution results tab if we remove the info above

* The *Actions* column allows you to show alerts generated from a given rule execution. Click the filter icon (image:images/filter-icon.png[Filter icon,18,17]) to create a global search filter based on the rule execution's ID value. This replaces any previously applied filters, changes the global date and time range to 24 hours before and after the rule execution, and displays a confirmation notification. You can revert this action by clicking *Restore previous filters* in the notification.

[float]
[[gaps-table]]
==== Gaps table

beta::[]

Gaps in rule executions are periods of time where a rule didn’t run as expected. These gaps can be caused by various disruptions, including system updates, rule failures, or simply turning off a rule. Addressing them is essential for maintaining consistent coverage and avoiding missed alerts. 

TIP: Refer to the <<troubleshoot-gaps>> section for strategies for avoiding gaps.

> The Gaps table provides you with information that you can use to assess the scope and severity of rule execution gaps. To control what's shown in the table, you can filter the table by gap status, select a time range for viewing gap data, and sort multiple columns. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use the information in the Gaps table to assess the scope and severity of rule execution gaps. To control what's shown in the table, you can filter the table by gap status, select a time range for viewing gap data, and sort multiple columns. 
```

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/gaps-table.png[Gaps table on the rule execution results tab]

The Gaps table has the following columns:

* **Status**: The current state of the gap. It can be `Filled`, `Partially filled`, or `Unfilled`.
* **Detected at**: The date and time the gap was first discovered.
* **Manual fill tasks**: The status of the manual run that’s filling the gap. For more details about the manual run, refer to its entry in the <<manual-runs-table,manual run table>>.
* **Event time covered**: How much progress the manual run has made filling the gap. 
+

> NOTE: If you stop a manual run that's filling a gap, the gap’s status is set to `Partially filled`. To fill the remaining gap, you can select the **Fill remaining gap** action or <<manually-run-rules,manually run>> the rule over the gap's time frame.

Reviewer: > If you stop a manual run that's filling a gap, the gap’s status is set to `Partially filled`

It really depends on what this task was able to do before user canceled it:

- if task was scheduled, but not yet execute any rule - gap will remain unfilled
- in case if there manual rule run larger than gap range, and user cancel it - gap can be filled if all execution related to gap was done

Author: How's this:
 
```suggestion
NOTE: If you stop a manual run that hasn't finished filling a gap, the gap’s status will be set to `Partially filled`. To fill the remaining gap, you can select the **Fill remaining gap** action or <<manually-run-rules,manually run>> the rule over the gap's time frame.
```
